                                                                           公众读本
                                                                           Public Reading




SHANGHAI MASTER PLAN 2017-2035

上海市城市总体规划
2017-2035 年
迈 向 卓越的 全球城市
STRIVING FOR THE EXCELLENT GLOBAL CITY




                         上海市规划和国土资源管理局
         Shanghai Urban Planning and Land Resource Administration Bureau
                                    2018.01
迈向卓越的全球城市


STRIVING
   STRIVINF
THETHE
    EXCEL
       EX
GLOBAL
   GLOBAL
        CI
OR
G FOR
ELLENT
ENT
CITY
Y
前言 PREFACE
上海是个有魅力的城市，东西方文化交融渗透到它的每一个角落，海纳百川的城市品格为市
民提供了多样化的自由发展的选择。面向 2035 年的未来，我们对这座城市究竟期待些什么 ?
我们理想中的上海又是怎样的模样？

在《上海市城市总体规划（2017-2035）》中，我们的规划主旨就是让各个年龄段的居民都
能够享受在上海的生活，并拥有健康的生活方式。

我们希望，2035 年的上海，建筑是可以阅读的，街区是适合漫步的，公园是最宜休憩的，
市民是尊法诚信文明的，城市始终是有温度的。

我们希望，未来的上海，跑步的人可以有地方跑，在家附近就有一片绿肺，跑累了坐在草地
上看看鸟儿发发呆就可以彻底地放松下来。让爱看戏的人有戏看，不需要去大剧院，在更多
街区里的小剧场中，观众就可以自由地讨论、甚至即兴客串一把。让孩子们在社区里就可以
安心地玩耍嬉闹，不需要担心被疾驰而过的车辆撞到，不存在任何消极空间和死角，大家相
互注视、相互关怀、相互守望。




Being a charming and inclusive city with unique “East meets West” culture around each
corner, Shanghai offers diversified options for free development of its citizens. What can
we expect from Shanghai in the upcoming 2035, And what will the ideal Shanghai look
like?
Pursuant to the Shanghai Master Plan (2017-2035), we aim to plan a Shanghai where
residents of all ages may enjoy their lives and lead a healthy lifestyle.
It is our hope that Shanghai in 2035 will be a city where buildings are enlightening,
streets are strolling-friendly and parks are enjoyable, while the citizens have the reputa-
tion of being law-abiding, credible and well-mannered. Shanghai, a city endowed with
tenderness.
It is our hope that the future Shanghai is a place where people may jog in the green spaces
close to their homes, and sit on the grass for a rest after jogging to watch birds fly by. As for
drama lovers, they may watch plays right within their neighborhood instead of travelling
afar to a grand theater. They may even voice their views about the play and improvise out
of fun and interest. For kids, they may play safely without worrying about being scratched
or run down by speeding vehicles. In a city with no neglected corner, everyone attends to
each other, cares for each other and supports each other.
我们希望，上海不仅是中国乃至世界的上海，更是市民的上海！市民如果倾注对城市的感情，
城市有机体的生命力和创造力则喷薄而出。请与我们一起努力，让上海在完成引领国家经济发
展和参与国际竞争的使命之外，更能成为一个正能量的城市、生命力旺盛的城市，能够让人安
居乐业，充分激发每个个体活力，让我们感到自己工作和生活的意义，并乐在其中。



It is also our hope that Shanghai is not only for China or the world, but for its citizens! With
the love and affection of its citizens, Shanghai will grow more vibrant, and become a foun-
tain of creativity. Let us try our utmost to build Shanghai into a place full of positive
energy and vitality that will fulfill its mission to lead the national economic develop-
ment and partake in the international competition. Let us build Shanghai into a place for
people to live a good and prosperous life, and stimulate their zest for life. Let us build Shang-
hai into a place where we can fully comprehend the significance of both our work and life,
and live our lives to the fullest.
《上海市城市总体规划（2017-2035）》（简称“上海2035”)由上海市人民政府组织编
制，经国务院批准，是上海辖区内城市规划、建设和管理的基本依据和法定文件，是引领上海
未来城市发展的重要纲领，实现“城市，让生活更美好”的发展蓝图。

为了更好地对本次总体规划进行宣传，也为了方便市民理解和阅读，制作了本读本，简要介绍
我市新一轮城市总体规划的成果，希望市民积极关注。由于版面原因，本读本内容仅是总体规
划成果的主要结论。


The Shanghai Master Plan 2016-2035 (hereinafter referred to as “Shanghai 2035” or the
Master Plan), is organized and prepared by Shanghai Municipal People’ s Government and
is approved by the State Council. It serves as the basis and official document for city plan-
ning, construction and management within the jurisdiction of Shanghai. It is also an im-
portant document to guide the future development of Shanghai, and a development blue-
print to realize “Better City, Better Life” .
We hereby prepare this public reading to publicize the Shanghai 2040, and give a brief
introduction on the new master plan of Shanghai so that we can have the follow-ups and
positive support from our citizens. Due to the limited layout, contents herein only refer to
the major conclusions from the Master Plan.
BetterBetter
        CityLife
目录 CONTENTS
第一部分 / 新的起点 新的未来
PART I / NEW START, NEW FUTURE
上海为什么需要一个新的总体规划
本次总体规划是如何组织开展编制工作的
本次总体规划编制的特点是哪些
Why Shanghai needs a new Master Plan?
How is the Master Plan organized?
What are the main characteristics of this Master Plan?



第二部分 / 上海：卓越的全球城市
PART II / SHANGHAI, THE EXCELLENT GLOBAL CITY

新目标
·适应国际趋势
·落实国家战略
·立足市民期待
新模式
·底线约束、内涵发展、弹性适应
·人口综合调控
·国土资源利用
新空间
·突出上海区域引领责任
·构建开放紧凑的市域空间格局


New Goals
• Adapt to international trends
• Implement national strategies
• Keep a foothold in public expectations
New Models
• Bottom-line control, endogenous development, flexible adaptation
• Comprehensive population regulation
• Usage of land resources
New Space
• Highlight Shanghai’s regional leading responsibility
• Form an open and compact city spatial model
第三部分 / 共同的行动 共同的家园
PART III / COMMON ACTION, COMMON HOME

更具活力的创新之城
· 提升上海建设全球城市的核心功能
· 建设更开放的国际枢纽
· 构筑“安全、便捷、绿色、高效、经济”的综合交通体系
· 营造更具吸引力的就业创业环境

更富魅力的人文之城
· 打造15分钟社区生活圈
· 加强历史文化遗产保护
· 塑造国际化大都市和江南水乡风貌特色

更可持续发展的生态之城
· 坚持生态优先，树立低碳发展典范
· 守护城市安全，建设韧性城市

A More Dynamic Innovation City
• Enhance Shanghai’ s core function to become a global city
• Develop a more open international hub
• Build a comprehensive transportation system that is “safe, convenient, green, efficient and
  economic”
• Create a more attractive environment for both employment and entrepreneurship

A More Attractive Humanistic City
• Create a 15-minute community living circle
• Strengthen conservation of historical and cultural heritage
• Shape the characteristics of an international metropolis with water town landscapes
A More Sustainable Eco-City
• Prioritize eco-city development and set an example for low-carbon development
• Safeguard city security and construct a resilient city



第四部分 / 更有力的规划实施保障
PART IV / ENSURING THE IMPLEMENTATION

优化“两规融合 多规合一”的空间规划体系
健全政策法规体系
建立多方协同的规划实施机制
健全规划的“监测-评估-维护”机制
Optimize the spatial planning system of “Integrated Urban Planning and Land Use Planning
Schemes as well as Promotion of ‘Multi-sectors’ Plans in One’”
Enhance the policy and regulation system
Establish a planning and implementation mechanism involving multi-parties
Perfect the “Monitor-Evaluate-Maintain” mechanism in the implementation of the Master Plan
      第一部分
      Part I

      新的起点 新的未来
      NEW START
      NEW FUTURE
       上海为什么需要一个新的总体规划
       Why Shanghai needs a new Master Plan ?


       本次总体规划是如何组织开展编制工作的
       How is the Master Plan organized ?


       本次总体规划编制的主要特点是哪些
       What are the main characteristics of this Master Plan?




09｜
｜10
           上海为什么需要一个新的总体规划
           Why Shanghai needs a new Master Plan ?

      立足历史新起点：开埠建市的一个半世纪以来，尤其是经历了改革开放 30 多年的快速发展，
      上海在历版总体规划的指导下，取得了瞩目的发展成绩。

      适应发展新趋势：当今世界，深度全球化、市场化、信息化影响深远，城市化步伐加快，
      而城市向生态化、人文化、区域一体化的发展态势日趋明显，全球进入了转型新时期。

      应对发展新挑战：上海在城市功能转型、人口持续增长、环境资源约束等方面的压力日益
      凸显，上海未来必须突破发展瓶颈，遏制城市病，实现城市发展模式转型。


      To stand at a new historical starting point: Since Shanghai was opened as a treaty
      port with a city system set up one and a half centuries ago, Shanghai has achieved
      remarkable success in the development under the guidance of previous master plans,
      especially after over 3 decades of rapid development in the reform and opening-up
      period.

      To adapt to the new development trends: The world today witnesses the accelerated
      urbanization under the far-reaching impact of intensified globalization, marketization
      and information. On the other hand, the world is entering a new transformation period
      when there is a growing trend to develop eco-cities featuring humanity and regional
      integration.

      To respond to new development challenges: Shanghai is under mounting pressure of
      function transformation, continuous population growth and environmental resource
      constraint, hence the city has to break through the development bottleneck, curb
      urban malaises and achieve transformation of the urban development model in the
      future.




11｜
                                                               Shanghai Master Plan / 2016-2035 / Public Reading




              本次总体规划是如何组织开展编制工作的
              How is this Master Plan Organized ?

   上海市城市总体规划编制工作领导小组 >>
   Leading Group of the Master Plan>>

 上海市城市总体规划编制工作领导小组                              Leading Group of the Master Plan

              16个区、38个委办局
                                                      16 Districts and 38 Committees,
                                                            Offices and Bureaus


      上海市城市总体规划编制工作领                            Leading Group Office of Shanghai
          导小组办公室                                          Master Plan
    市规划国土资源局、市发展改革委、                            Municipal Land & Resource Planning Bureau,
                                                Municipal Development and Reform Com-                         专家顾问
        市经济信息化委、                                mission, Municipal Commission of Economy
                                                and Informatization, Municipal Housing and
                                                                                                               委员会
      市住房城乡建设管理委、
                                                Urban-Rural Construction and Management                      Committee
       市交通委、市环保局、                               Committee, Municipal Transportation Com-
        市政府研究室、                                 mission, Municipal Environmental Protection                   of Expert
                                                Bureau, Research Office of Municipal People’s                 Advisors
       市政府发展研究中心                                Government, and R&D Center of Municipal
                                                People’s Government



秘书处            战略研究        专项规划       公众参与              数据技术           区县联络             技术核心
                小组          小组         小组                小组             小组               小组
               Strategic    Special      Public            Data         District &
                                                                                          Technical
Secretariat    Research    Planning   Participation     Technology    County Liaison
                                                                                         Core Group
                Group        Group       Group             Group         Group




  多部门共同协作 >>
  Multi-sector collaboration >>

 ——邀请40个研究团队，联合市政府22个委办局、16个区人民政府共同开展战略专题研
 究、专项规划编制以及区县城市总体规划和土地利用总体规划编制研究。

 ——组织上海市城市规划设计研究院、上海同济城市规划设计研究院、中国城市规划设计研究
 院上海分院、上海市地质调查研究院等4家单位联合编制规划成果。

 — 40 research groups and cooperated with 22 commissions and committees of the municipal
 people’s government and 16 district people’s governments have been invited to jointly carry out
 special strategic study, formulate special plans and study the preparation of an urban master
 plan for districts and counties as well as a master plan for land utilization.
 — Shanghai Urban Planning and Design Research Institute, Shanghai Tongji Urban Planning &
 Design Institute, Shanghai Branch of China Academy of Urban Planning & Design, and Shanghai
 Institute of Geological Survey have been organized to jointly work out the planning results.




                                                                                                                          ｜12
      多领域专家咨询
      建立由核心专家、咨询专家组成的专家决策咨询机制，来自不同领域的专家对规划
      编制进行全过程把控，强化规划编制的专业支撑。

      多渠道公众参与
      搭建新兴和传统媒体平台，开展上海城市发展目标调查，召开 11 场战略专题研讨会，
      成立公众参与咨询团，举办概念规划设计竞赛、SEA-Hi ！论坛、“我要看、我要写、
      我要画”等活动。

      多层次区域协调
      通过规划行业协会搭建平台，主动与江浙两省规划主管部门联系，就规划重要内容进行
      沟通。


      Multi-field expert consultation
      An expert decision-making consultation mechanism comprising of core experts and
      consultants was established for these experts from various fields to control the
      entire process of plan making and strengthen its professional support.

      Multi-channel public participation
      A series of activities were carried out, including but not limited to the establishment
      of the new and traditional media platforms, roll-out of public vision survey, holding
      of 11 special strategic seminars, foundation of a public participation consultation
      group, and launching of concept planning and design competition, “SEA-Hi!” forum,
      and “I Want to Watch, Write and Draw”.

      Multi-level regional coordination
      The establishment of platform through the planning association served as an op-
      portunity to achieve proactive liaison with competent planning departments of
      Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and communicate the major planning issues.




13｜
                                                        Shanghai Master Plan / 2016-2040 / Public Reading




           本次总体规划编制的主要特点是哪些
           What are the main characteristics of this Master Plan?

“上海 2035”是党的十九大召开后第一个展望至 2035 年并向国务院报批的超大城
 市总规，具有重要影响力和引领示范作用。“上海 2035”全面贯彻落实党的十九大精神，
 旗帜鲜明地把习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想作为指导思想，全面落实新时代坚
 持和发展中国特色社会主义的基本方略。
Shanghai 2035 is highly influential and plays an exemplary role as the first master
plan of a megacity to envision as far as 2035 and the first one approved by the State
Council following the 19th National Congress of the CPC.It comprehensively imple-
ments the spirit of the 19th National Congress, takes Xi Jinping’ s thought on social-
ism with Chinese characteristics for a new era for guiding ideas with a clear stand. It
comprehensively implements the basic policy of upholding and developing socialism
with Chinese characteristics for the new era.


更加重视创新发展                                               更加重视开放发展
More emphasis on innovative development                More emphasis on open development

进一步突出以人为本、内涵发展的本质要求，统                                  进一步突出上海面向国际、服务全国的门
筹改革、科技、文化三大动力                                          户枢纽地位
To further highlight the essential requirements of     Further highlight Shanghai’ s status as a hub
a people-centered and endogenous development           facing the world and serving the entire
and link reform to technology and culture as a         country
three-wheel vehicle

更加重视协调发展                                               更加重视共享发展
More emphasis on cordinated development                More emphasis on shared development

进一步突出区域协同、城乡一体的空间格局，统                                  进一步突出多方参与、协同治理的实施机
筹好空间、规模、产业三大结构和规划、建设、                                  制，统筹政府、社会、市民三大主体
管理三大环节
To further highlight the spatial pattern of regional   Further highlight the implementation
collaboration and urban-rural integration, coordi-     mechanism of multi-participation and col-
nate space, scale and industry and incorporate         laborative governance, coordinate the gov-
planning, construction and management                  ernment, society and the public

更加重视绿色发展
More emphasis on green development

进一步突出底线约束、低碳韧性的路径模式，统
筹生产、生活、生态三大布局
Further highlight the model of bottom line control
and low-carbon resilience, integrate production,
living conditions and ecological development




                                                                                                            ｜14
      第二部分
      Part II

      上海
      卓越的全球城市
      SHANGHAI
      THE EXCELLENT
      GLOBAL CITY
       新目标
       New Goals


       新模式
       New Models


       新空间
       New Space




15｜
｜16
                新目标
                New Goals
      适应国际趋势
      全球化与区域化继续长期影响世界格局，协同发展的网络化共享城市时代已经到来；加强“互
      联网 +”推动新技术革命迭代发生，全球迎来创新驱动的知识经济时代；新的发展语境形成，
      世界进入资源环境友好、人文关怀至上的生态文明时代。

      落实国家战略
      以习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想为指导，全面贯彻落实党的十九大精神，努力当好
      新时代改革开放排头兵，创新发展先行者，把创新摆在城市发展全局的核心位置，将文化
      视作城市发展的战略性和核心性资源，肩负国家使命与时代担当，引领区域深度参与国际
      竞争。

      立足市民期待
      上海城市发展目标公众调查收集了 16000 多份有效问卷。结果显示，市民对于上海建设成
      为“环境友好、经济发达、文化多元、安全宜居的城市”寄予了最大的希望，认为“环境污染、
      住房和居住环境、社区养老、就医”等问题还需要改善。


      Adapt to International Trends
      As globalization and regionalization continue to influence the whole world in the long
      run, the era of coordinated development with a network based city has arrived. While
      efforts are being made to enhance the “Internet+” program to push forward new
      technological reform iteratively, the world is embracing an era of innovation-driven
      knowledge economy. With a new development context established, the world has also
      stepped into an era of ecological civilization that puts environmental friendliness and
      humanistic approach first.

      Implement National Strategies
      Guided by Xi Jinping’ s thought on socialism with Chinese characteristics for a new era,
      Shanghai tries the best to play the pioneering role in the reform and opening-up in the
      new era and set up the pace for innovation and development. By putting innovation at
      the core of the overall urban development and regarding culture as a strategic and es-
      sential resource for urban development, Shanghai takes on the national mission and
      historical responsibility of guiding the region to in-depth participation in the
      international competition.

      Established in Public Expectations
      The survey of public visions on Shanghai received over 16,000 completed question-
      naires, showing that the public have placed great hope on building Shanghai into an
      “environment-friendly, economically-developed, culturally-diversified and safe
      and livable city” . The results of the survey also pointed out that efforts should be
      made on resolve such issues as environmental pollution, residential housing and living
      environment, community-based elder care and health care.



17｜
公众意愿调查中，市民对未来上海发展目标的认同情况 >>
Public recognitions on Shanghai’s future development goals per the survey >>

环保城市 环境友好、低碳出行的
                    Eco-city with sound environment and                                                            17%
                    low-carbon transportation

全球城市 经济高度发展的        Global city with highly developed economy                                              15.2%

                    Diversified and inclusive Shanghai-style
海派文化城市 多元包容的
                    cultural city                                                                  12.8%

                    Caring city that is considerate to the elderly,
关怀城市 为老弱病残孕等弱者考虑的
                    infirm, sick, disabled and pregnant                                        12.1%

                    Livable city with convenient transportation
宜居城市 交通便捷、配套设施健全的
                    and complete supporting infrastructure                                   11.3%

安全城市 无灾害和犯罪的        Safe city without disasters and crimes                                   11.2%

智慧城市 信息技术和通讯发达的
                    Smart city with sophisticated IT and
                    communication technology                                                 11%

创新与创意城市 研发设计实力雄厚的   Innovative and creative city with solid
                    research and design capacity                                      9.3%


                                                                      0%   5%   10%                15%             20%




                                                                                                                         ｜18
      城市性质
      上海是我国的直辖市之一，长江三角洲世界级城市群的核心城市，国际经济、金融、贸易、
      航运、科技创新中心和文化大都市，国家历史文化名城，并将建设成为卓越的全球城市、
      具有世界影响力的社会主义现代化国际大都市。



      目标愿景
      立足 2020 年，建成具有全球影响力的科技创新中心基本框架，基本建成国际经济、金融、贸
      易、航运中心和社会主义现代化国际大都市。在更高水平上全面建成小康社会，为我国决胜全
      面建成小康社会贡献上海力量。


      展望 2035 年，基本建成卓越的全球城市，令人向往的创新之城、人文之城、生态之城，具有世
      界影响力的社会主义现代化国际大都市。重要发展指标达到国际领先水平，在我国基本实现
      社会主义现代化的进程中，始终当好新时代改革开放排头兵、创新发展先行者。


      梦圆 2050 年，全面建成卓越的全球城市，令人向往的创新之城、人文之城、生态之城，具有世
      界影响力的社会主义现代化国际大都市。各项发展指标全面达到国际领先水平，为我国建成
      富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国、实现中华民族伟大复兴中国梦谱写更美好的
      上海篇章。




      上海：卓越的全球城市，
         令人向往的创新之城、人文之城、生态之城，
         具有世界影响力的社会主义现代化国际大都市。




19｜
Nature of the City
Shanghai is one of the municipalities under direct administration of the Central Govern-
ment of China and the core of the world class city cluster in the Yangtze River Delta area.
Shanghai is also an international center of economy, finance, trade, shipping, scientific &
technologic innovation and a cultural metropolis as well as a national historical city.
Shanghai will be an excellent global city and a modern socialist international metropolis
with world influence.

Vision and Objectives
In 2020, a year of foundation-building, Shanghai will establish the fundamental framework
of an innovation center of science and technology with global influence and basically
build itself into an international center of economy, finance, trade and shipping as well as
a modern socialist international metropolis. The city will complete the building of a moder-
ately prosperous society in all respects at a higher level and contribute its due part to securing
nation’ s decisive victory in building such a society.
In 2035, a year of envisioning, Shanghai will basically build itself into an excellent global
city, an admirable city of innovation, humanity and sustainability as well as a modern so-
cialist international metropolis with world influence. With its critical indicators of develop-
ment reaching world-leading level, the city will serve as a vanguard and pioneer in reform and
opening-up and innovation throughout the process of basically building a modern socialist
country.
In 2050, a year of accomplishing, Shanghai will complete the building of an excellent global
city, an admirable city of innovation, humanity and sustainability in all respects as well as
a modern socialist international metropolis with world influence. With all indicators of de-
velopment reaching world-leading level, the city will write a more brilliant chapter for building
China into a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally ad-
vanced, harmonious, and beautiful and realizing the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation.




Shanghai: An excellent global city
          An admirable city of innovation, humanity and sustainability
          A modern socialist international metropolis with world influence




                                                                                                 ｜20
                     分目标 1
                     更具活力：一座创新之城 >>
                     More Dynamic: An Innovation City >>

      上海将依托国家创新体系建设，充分发挥服务长江经济带的龙头城市和
      “一带一路”建设桥头堡的作用，带动形成具有全球竞争力的长三角世界
      级城市群，基本建成具有全球影响力的科技创新中心。
      Based the constructing of national innovation system, Shanghai will fully play
      the roles as a leading city serving the Yangtze River Economic Zone and a
      bridgehead of the Belt and Road Initiative.Shanghai will basically become a
      science and technology innovation center with global influence, and lead to
      build the world-class Yangtze River Delta Urban Agglomerations with compet-
      itiveness.


                 提升全球城市核心功能
                 Improve core functions as a global city

                 • R&D 投入占全市地区生产总值比例达到 5.5% 左右
                 • 金融业增加值占全市生产总值比例达到 18% 左右
                 • 年入境境外旅客总量达到 1400 万人次左右
                 • 产业基地内用于先进制造业发展的工业用地面积不低于 150 平方公里

                 • R&D input will be 5.5% of the gross regional product.
                 • Added value of finance will be 18% of the entire city’s GDP.
                 • Total annual inbound tourists will be 14 million.
                 • Industrial land for development of advanced manufacturing in the industrial
                   base will be no less than 150 square kilometers.


                 追求枢纽门户地位稳步提升
                 Seek steady rise in status as a gateway city

                 • 出入境客流比例达到 38%，国际集装箱中转比例达到 13%
                 • 高速无线数据通讯网络覆盖率达到 100%
                 • International travelling passenger volume will reach 38%, and the rate of
                  international container transit will be no less than 13%.
                 • The coverage of high-speed wireless data communication network will be
                  up to 100%.




21｜
实现交通服务能力不断优化
Optimize service capability of city transportation

• 基本实现 10 万人以上新市镇轨道交通站点全覆盖
• 力争实现中心城平均通勤时间不超过 40 分钟

• Each new town with over 100,000 residents will have its metro station
• Efforts will be made to reduce the average commute time to less than 40 minutes in central
  Shanghai .


促进就业创业环境快速形成
Promote creation of sound employment and business start-up environment

• 创新群体占就业人口比例大幅增长
• 新建住房中政府、机构和企业持有的租赁性住房比例达到 20%
• Ratio of innovative groups among the working population will be substantially increased.
• Ratio of rentable units operated by government, institutions and enterprises willtake up
 20% of all newly-built housing.




                                                                                               ｜22
                       分目标 2
                       更富魅力：一座人文之城 >>
                       More Attractive: A Humanistic City >>

      面对老龄化程度日趋严重、人口结构更加多元的未来社会，上海致力于
      通过对城市品质魅力的不懈追求，成为文化治理完善、市民高度认同并
      共同参与，兼具人文底蕴和时尚魅力的幸福、健康的人文城市。

      In consideration of an aging and more diversified population, Shanghai , a
      city beaming with stylish charm, resorts to the unswerving quality im-
      provement so as to be a happy and healthy humanistic city boasting
      complete culture governance, high approval from its citizens with active
      participation and profound cultural heritages.




      构建多元融合的 15 分钟社区生活圈
      Build a 15-minute community living circle of diversification and inclusiveness

      • 社区公共服务设施 15 分钟步行可达覆盖率达到 99% 左右
      • 公共开放空间 (400 平方米以上的公园和广场 ) 的 5 分钟步行可达率达到 90% 左右

      • 99% accessibility to community public service facilities within 15 minutes’ walking dis-
        tance.
      • Up to 90% accessibility to open public space (park and squares over 400 square meters)
        within 5 minutes’ walking distance.


23｜                                                                                                ｜20
保护风格独特的历史遗产
Conserve unique historical heritage

• 力争拥有不少于 2 处世界文化遗产
• 大幅度提高历史文化遗产保护的公共预算比例

• Ensure at least 2 sites to be listed by UNESCO as World Cultural Heritage
• Substantially increase the heritage protection budget in the public budget



塑造特色凸显的城乡风貌
Create featured urban-rural landscapes

• 建成 2000 公里左右的骨干绿道
• Complete backbone green roads of 2000km long




培育兼收并蓄的文化氛围
Cultivate an inclusive culture milieu

• 文化类从业人员占就业总人口比例达到 10% 左右
• People working in the cultural sector will take up 10% of total employment




                                                                               ｜24
                    分目标 3

                    更可持续发展：一座生态之城 >>
                    More Sustainable: An Eco-City >>

      面 对 全 球 气 候 变 化 和 环 境 资 源 约 束 带 来 的 发 展 瓶 颈，上 海 致 力 于 在
      2035 年建设成为拥有更具适应能力和韧性的生态城市，并通过空间领
      域和基础设施方面的示范，成为引领国际超大城市绿色、低碳、可持续
      发展的标杆。
      In the face of the global climate change and development bottlenecks due to
      environmental and resource constraints, Shanghai is committed to becoming
      a more adaptable and resilient eco-city as well as a benchmark for interna-
      tional megacities in terms of green, low-carbon and sustainable develop-
      ment by developing pilot spaces and infrastructures.



               开展气候变化的积极应对
               Proactively respond to climate change

               • 提高可再生能源占一次能源供应的比例
               • 碳排放总量较 2025 年峰值下降 5% 左右

               • Increase ratio of renewable energy sources in primary energy sources
               • Reduce total carbon emission by about 5% compared to the peak in 2025




               营造绿色开放的生态网络
               Create a green and open eco-network

               • 生态用地（含绿化广场用地）占陆域面积的比例不低于 60%
               • 森林覆盖率达到 23% 左右
               • 人均公园绿地面积力争达到 13 平方米
               • Ecological land will account for at least 60% of the total land area
               • Forest coverage will be 23%
               • Park green space will be up to 13 square meters per capita through efforts




25｜
建设科学全面的环保治理体系
Establish a sound and comprehensive environmental regulation system

• PM2.5 年均浓度控制在 25 微克 / 立方米左右
• 水（环境）功能区达标率达到 100%
• Annual mean concentration of PM2.5 will be controlled at around 25mcg/m³.
• Compliance rate of water (environmental) function zone will be up to 100%.


形成稳定高效的综合防灾能力
Achieve stable and efficient comprehensive disaster prevention capability


• 应急避难场所人均避难面积达到 2.0 平方米以上
• 主城区与新城的医疗急救中心 3 公里范围内可达，郊区的医疗急救中心 10 公里范围内可达
• Per capita emergency shelter area will be over 2.0 square meters.
• Medical first-aid center will be accessible within a radius of 3km in the main city and new
  cities, and within a radius of 10km in suburbs.




                                                                                                ｜26
                   新模式
                   New Models
      为应对资源环境紧约束的挑战和城市未来发展的不确定性，上海将以成为
      高密度超大城市可持续发展的典范城市为目标，积极探索超大城市睿智发
      展的转型路径。
      To cope with challenges of resource and environmental restrictions, and the
      uncertainty in future urban development, Shanghai aims to become a para-
      digm of sustainable development for high-density megacities, and ac-
      tively explore transformation paths for smart development of megacities.

        底线约束：落实规划建设用地总规模“负增长”要求，牢牢守住“建设用地、人口规模、生态环
        境、城市安全”四条发展底线。

        内涵发展：实施创新驱动，激发城市活力；推动城市有机更新，转向存量规划；提升城市品质，
        塑造城市精神；推进城乡一体，引领区域协同。

        弹性适应：面对城市发展的不确定性，完善多情景规划策略，创新功能布局弹性模式，建立空
        间留白机制和动态评估调整机制，构建富有弹性的空间策略和管理机制。


        Bottom-line Control: To satisfy requirement on the “negative growth” of the overall
        planned construction land, and strictly abide by the four development baselines, i.e.
        “construction land boundary, population size ceiling, ecological environment boundary
        and city safety requirement”.
        Endogenous Development: To carry out innovation and simulate urban vitality; pro-
        mote organic urban renewal and turn to non-expansionary planning; improve urban
        quality and foster the spirit of the city; push forward urban-rural integration and lead
        regional coordination.
        Flexible Adaptation: To keep in mind the uncertainty of urban development, improve
        the multi-scenario planning strategy, create a new flexible functional layout model, es-
        tablish the space reserving mechanism and constant evaluation & adjustment mecha-
        nism, and construct a flexible spatial strategy and management mechanism.




       发展模式转型
        DEVELOPMENT MODE
        TRANSFORMATION
27｜
         人口综合调控 >>
         Management of population >>
19.2%                                      2415万                            9%
65岁以上户籍老龄人口                                全市常住人口                           少年儿童
Registered population                      Permanent population             Teenagers
aged over 65                               of the city                      and children




                                2015年人口统计
                           2015 Demographic Statistics


严格落实中央严控超大城市人口规模的要求
缓解人口快速增长与资源环境紧约束之间的矛盾，至2020年，将常住人口控制在2500万
人以内，并以2500万人左右的规模作为2035年常住人口调控目标。
满足城市实际服务人口的合理需求
包括常住人口、半年以下暂住人口、跨市域通勤人口、短期游客在内的城市实际服务人
口，对水资源、能源、交通等基础设施和公共服务设施供给以及就业岗位等要素配置做弹
性预留。
应对上海日益明显的老龄化、少子化和国际化趋势
明确发展策略，进一步提升人口发展质量，优化人口结构和布局。

Strictly follow central government’ s requirement on controlling population in
megacities
In order to mitigate the contradiction between rapid population growth and resource
and environment restrictions, Shanghai will control permanent population within 25
million persons by 2020, and set population size of around 25 million persons as the
goal for permanent population regulation by 2035.
Meet rational needs of the people served by the city
Population served by the city includes permanent population, floating population
living in the city for less than half a year continuously, cross-city commuting population
and short-term tourists. Flexibility is reserved for allocating water resources, energy,
transportation and other infrastructure and public service facilities, employment oppor-
tunities and other factors to meet to demand of ASP.
Respond to Shanghai’ s trends of increasingly aging population, low-birth-rate
and internationalization
Shanghai will define development strategy to further improve population development
quality and to optimize population structure and distribution.


                                                                                             ｜28
             国土资源利用 >>
             Usage of Land Resources >>


      按照规划建设用地总规模“负增长”要求，全市规划建设用地总规
      模控制在3200平方公里以内。
      Based on the requirement on “Negative Growth” of total land planned for construc-
      tion, such land across shall be controlled within 3,200 square kilometers.




      实现广域空间统筹
      注重陆海统筹开发，积极开发低空空域，充分利用地下空间，构建陆海空开放型国土开发
      格局。

      优化生态、农业、城镇三大空间
      按照市域空间结构形成以“三大空间、四条红线”为基本框架的空间分区管制体系，统筹
      各类规划的空间要求，强化土地用途管制和空间管制。统筹优化市域生态、农业和城镇“三
      大空间”，促进空间复合利用，建立生态保护红线、永久基本农田保护红线、城市开发边界
      和文化保护控制线“四线”管控体系。

      土地利用优化
      确保生态用地（含绿化广场用地）占市域陆域面积比例不低于 60%，增加绿地、公共服务
      设施等用地的比例，坚持农村居民点用地优化与拆并并重，积极推进存量用地二次开发和
      低效工业用地减量。探索商业、办公、居住、公共设施与市政基础设施等用地的复合开发，
      推进轨道交通场站的综合开发利用。




              确保市域生态用地（含绿化广场用地）占陆域面积
                                                                   60%
                                          Proportion of ecological land
            (including land for afforested squares) in city’s overall land


29｜
Comprehensive space coordination
Focus on overall development of land and sea, actively exploit low-altitude airspace
and make the most of underground space to build an open land-sea-air development
model.

Optimize ecological, agricultural and urban spaces
Based on the city’ s spatial structure, form a system of planning control according to
space classification with the basic framework of “three spaces and four red lines” and
coordinate spatial requirements from all kinds of plans; Strengthen land use control
and space control. Coordinate and optimize “three spaces” , i.e., ecological, agricultural
and urban spaces, in the city; promote integrated utilization of space; establish a “four
line” control system covering ecological conservation red line, permanent prime crop-
land conservation red line, urban development boundary and cultural protection con-
trol line.

Optimize land utilization
Ensure that the proportion of ecological land area (including land for afforested
squares) in the city’ s overall land area is no less than 60%; increase the proportion of
green spaces, spaces for public service facilities, etc.; attach equal importance to opti-
mization and dismantling of rural residential land; actively push forward secondary de-
velopment of land stock, and reduce inefficiently-used industrial land. Explore integrat-
ed development of land for retail, office, residence, public facilities and municipal infra-
structure; and promote the comprehensive development and utilization of rail termi-
nals and metro stations.




                                                                                               ｜30
                    新空间
                    New Space
      本次规划积极响应国家“一带一路”、长江经济带、长江三角洲城市群协同发
      展等国家战略，强调立足上海市域，更要面向区域，从更开阔的视野、更高的
      定位去研究上海未来城市发展的战略框架，构建开放协调的发展格局。
      Responding to the national strategies including the Belt and Road Initiative, Yangtze River
      Economic Zone and synergetic development of Yangtze River Delta Urban Agglomerations,
      the Master Plan places emphasis on the initiatives based on the municipality and focus
      more on the region so as to study the future strategic framework of Shanghai’ s urban de-
      velopment from a broader and higher perspective and build an open and harmonious de-
      velopment model.



      都市圈           面向区域 以都市圈全面承载国家重要战略和要求
        CITY        Region-based Make the metropolitan area comprehensively carry out
       CIRCLE       important national strategies and requirements

      依托交通运输网络培育形成多级多类发展轴线，推动近沪地区（90 分钟通勤范围）及周边同
      城化都市圈的协同发展，积极完善区域功能网络，加强基础设施统筹，推动区域生态环境共建
      共治，形成多维度的区域协同治理机制，引领长三角城市群一体化发展。

      Multilevel and multi-type development axis will be developed and formed based on the
      transportation network to promote synergetic development in the areas near Shanghai
      (within 90 minutes commuting distance) and surrounding integrated metropolitan areas,
      actively improve the regional function network, strengthen overall planning of infrastruc-
      ture, facilitate the co-construction and co-governance of regional ecological environment,
      form a multidimensional regional co-governance mechanism, and lead the integrated
      development of Yangtze River Delta Urban Agglomerations.



      城镇圈           立足市域 以城镇圈作为空间组织和资源配置的基本单元
       TOWN         City-based Make the town cluster the basic unit of spatial organization
       CIRCLE
                    and resource allocation

      “上海 2035”将在郊区构筑若干个以新城或新市镇为核心的城镇圈，积极推进郊区地区的城
       乡统筹发展，实现就业、生活、服务等功能一体化，并依托多模式公共交通网络，形成圈内交
       通出行 30-40 分钟。

      “Shanghai 2035” will build town clusters centering around new cities or new towns in the
      suburbs, propel overall urban and rural development in the suburbs, realize integration of
      employment, life, services and other functions, and achieve circle-wide accessibility within
      30 to 40 minutes based on multi-modal public transportation network.


31｜
生活圈              关注社区 以15分钟生活圈作为社会治理和社区公共资源配置
 LIVING          的基本单元
 CIRCLE
                 Focus on Communities Make the 15-minute life circle a basic unit of social
                 governance and basis for common community resource allocation

“上海 2035”重点关注社区作为网络化时代城市的基本社会生活的空间单元，通过 15 分钟步
 行生活圈的构建，让市民“住有所居”，日常生活环境更加宜人，出行更加方便，归属感和认
 同感更强。

“Shanghai 2035” mainly focuses on the communities as spatial units of basic urban social
life in the networked era, and the building of a life circles within 15 minutes’ walking dis-
tance so as to provide appropriate housing for residents, create a more pleasant environ-
ment of living, facilitate more convenient transportation and bestow residents with a
higher sense of belonging and identity.




   来源：上海概念规划设计竞赛，掌中城市 作品
   Source: Palm City in Shanghai Concept Planning and Design Competition




                                                                                                ｜32
                 突出上海区域引领责任 >>
                 Highlight Shanghai’s Regional Leading Responsibility >>

      发挥上海在“一带一路”建设和长江经济带发展中的作用，强化上海对于
      长三角城市群的引领作用，以上海大都市圈承载国家战略和要求。
      Give play to Shanghai’ s role in the Belt and Road Initiative and the Yangtze River
      Economic Zone strategy, consolidate Shanghai’ s leadership role in Yangtze River Delta
      Urban Agglomerations, and bear national strategies and requirements within the Shanghai
      Metropolitan Area metropolitan area.



                 强化生态环境共保共治
                 Strengthen joint protection and governance of ecological environment


                 共同完善长江口、东海海域、环太湖、环淀山湖、环杭州湾等生态区域的保护，
                 结合黄浦江和吴淞江形成重要的区域生态廊道，推动区域、流域环境的联防联治。
                 Jointly improve the protection of ecological regions such as Yangtze River Estu-
                 ary, East China Sea, area around Taihu Lake, area around Dianshan Lake and
                 area around Hangzhou Bay, and promote joint prevention and control of
                 regional environment and drainage system, in combination with the important
                 regional ecological corridor formed by Huangpu River and Wusong River.


                 加强区域交通设施的互联互通
                 Enhance interconnection of regional transportation facilities

                 推动上海浦东国际机场、虹桥国际机场与周边无锡硕放、南通兴东、嘉兴等机场
                 的联动，加强上海港与杭州湾沿海港口和长江下游港口的分工合作，深化江海联运、
                 海铁联运模式。
                 Promote connectivity among Shanghai Pudong International Airport, Hongq-
                 iao International Airport and surrounding airports such as Wuxi Shuofang Air-
                 port, Nantong Xingdong Airport and Jiaxing Airport; enhance the division of
                 work and cooperation of the Port of Shanghai, coastal ports of Hangzhou Bay
                 and downstream ports of Yangtze River; and enhance integrated river-ocean
                 transportation and integrated sea-railway transportation modes.




33｜
促进区域市政基础设施的共建共享
Promote joint construction and sharing of regional municipal infrastructure

探索建立长三角区域内水源地联动及水资源应急机制，强化市政基础设施的区域协调，实现电
力、天然气、高速信息等市政廊道的无缝衔接，协调区域防灾救灾基础设施布局。

Explore and establish water source linkage and water resource emergency mechanisms
within the Yangtze River Delta region, and strengthen regional coordination of municipal
infrastructure; realize seamless connection of electrical power, natural gas, high-speed
information, and other municipal infrastructure, and harmonize regional infrastructure
layout for disaster prevention and control.

加强区域文化共融共通
Strengthen integration and sharing of regional culture

探索水乡古镇联动开发和世界文化遗产申请等策略，共同促进江南文化以及中国历史文化的传
承与创新。

Explore strategies such as integrated development of historical water towns, and joint ap-
plication for world cultural heritages, so as to jointly promote the inheritance and innova-
tion of the culture south of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River as well as Chinese histo-
ry & culture.


统筹战略协同区共同发展
Pursue joint development of strategic cooperation regions

对于上海与周边省市在沿海、滨江、环湖等具有区域价值的战略性地区，如东部沿海战略协同区、
杭州湾北岸战略协同区、长江口战略协同区、环淀山湖战略协同区等，加强空间统筹力度。

Intensify overall spatial planning strength of strategic coastal, riverside and lakeside
regions with regional value in Shanghai and surrounding provinces and cities, such as the
strategic cooperation regions in the east coast, north coast of Hangzhou Bay, Yangtze River
estuary and around Dianshan Lake.




                                                                                                ｜34
      上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市区位图｜
      Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Location Map |




35｜
            构建开放紧凑的市域空间格局 >>
            Form an Open and Compact Municipality Spatial
            layout >>

规划将以生态基底为约束，以重要的交通廊道为骨架，以城镇圈促进城乡
统筹，以生活圈构建生活网络，优化城乡体系，培育多中心公共活动体系，
形成“网络化、多中心、组团式、集约型”的空间体系。
Constrained by ecological baselines, the Master Plan will draw on key transportation corri-
dors as the framework, apply the town clusters to promote overall urban and rural develop-
ment, apply life circles to build the life network, optimize urban and rural system, cultivate a
multicenter public activity system, and form a “networked spatial system characterized
by multi-centers, clusters, and compactness”.




  促进城乡一体化发展，制定差异化空间发展策略，形成“主城区 - 新城
  - 新市镇 - 乡村”的市域城乡体系 >>
  Promote urban and rural integration, create differentiated spatial development strate-
  gies and a “main city – new city – new town – village” municipality-wide urban and
  rural system >>



   主城区：提升功能能级
   以中心城为主体，将中心城周边的虹桥、川沙、宝山、闵行 4 个主城片区共同纳入主城区
   统一管理，作为全球城市功能的主要承载区。

   Main city: improve functional energy level
   Take the inner areas of the main city (IMC) as the main body to include its 4 outer areas
   of the main city (OMC) (i.e., Hongqiao, Chuansha, Baoshan and Minhang) into the main
   city for unified administration, and make them the main bearing areas for global urban
   functions.




                                                                                                   ｜36
      新城：突出综合性节点城市功能
      以区域重要功能廊道为依托，将嘉定、松江、青浦、奉贤、南汇等 5 个新城培育成在全球
      城市区域中具有综合性辐射带动能力的节点城市。金山滨海地区、崇明城桥地区，发展形
      成相对独立的门户型节点城市。

      New city: highlight node city with comprehensive functions
      Based on important regional functional corridors, develop the five new cities (i.e., Jiad-
      ing, Songjiang, Qingpu, Fengxian and Nanhui) into nodal cities with comprehensive
      radiating and driving effect in global urban areas. Develop Binhai area in Jinshan and
      Chengqiao area in Chongming into relatively independent gateway node cities.

      新市镇：促进分类协调发展
      突出新市镇统筹镇区、集镇和周边乡村地区的作用，根据新市镇的功能特点和职能差异，
      形成核心镇、中心镇、一般镇三类推动协调发展。

      New town: promote a harmonious categorized development
      Highlight the new urban town’ s overall coordination role for built areas, market towns
      and surrounding villages, and form the core, central and ordinary towns to propel a har-
      monious development based on functional characteristics and functional differences of
      new town.

      乡村：凸显人与自然和谐的宜居功能
      乡村地区将通过生产方式转变带动农民生活方式的转变，改善人居环境，保护传统风貌和
      自然环境。
      Village: highlight harmonious livable function between humans and nature
      Drive changes in peasants’ lifestyle, improve human settlement and protect traditional
      and natural environment in the village area via the production mode transition.




37｜
上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域城乡体系规划｜
Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Urban-Rural System Plan |




                                                                      ｜38
       以提升全球城市功能和满足市民多元活动为宗旨，形成由“城市主中心（中央活
       动区）、城市副中心、地区中心以及社区中心”构成的中心体系 >>
        Aim at improving global urban functions and meeting citizens’ needs for diversified
        activities to create a central system comprising of “city center (central activities zone) -
        city sub-center - local center - community center” >>




         上海城市公共活动中心体系
         System for Urban Public Activities centers in Shanghai
                           地域类型 Regional Type
          层级体系
                                                                                      主要职能 Main Functions
      Hierarchy System 主城区 Main City 郊区 Suburb

                                                                           全球城市功能的核心承载区，包括金融、商务、商
                                                                           业、文化、休闲、旅游等功能的高度融合，既链接
         第一层级                 城市主中心                                        全球网络，又服务整个市域。
        城市主中心                (中央活动区)                                       Core bearer of global urban functions, not only
                                                            —              including highly integrated finance, commerce,
        Hierarchy I            City center                                 business, culture, leisure, tourism and other func-
        City center      (central activities zone)                         tional areas, but also linking with the global net-
                                                                           work and serving the entire municipality.

         第二层级                                            新城中心
                              主城副中心                  Center of new city    面向所在区域的公共活动中心，同时承担面向国际
        城市副中心                                                              的特定职能。
                             Sub-center of
         Hierarchy II        the main city              核心镇中心              Public activity center for the region and playing spe-
       City sub-center                               Center of core town   cific functions for the globe.

                                                       新城地区中心
          第三层级                                         Local center of
          地区中心                 地区中心                       new city         面向所在地区的公共活动中心。
                              Local center
        Hierarchy III                                   新市镇中心              Public activity center for the local region.
        Local center
                                                       Local center of
                                                         new town

         第四层级
         社区中心             社区中心                          社区中心               面向所在社区的公共活动中心。
        Hierarchy IV   Community center              Community center      Public activity center for the community.
      Community center




39｜
上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域公共活动中心网络规划｜
Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Municipal Public Activity Center Network Plan |




                                                                                            ｜40
        打破传统城镇体系以行政层级配置公共资源的方式，依托城镇圈发展战略，
        实现郊区地区的城乡统筹发展 >>
        Break through the traditional urban system that allocates public resources at the
        administrative level, and rely on the town circle development strategy to achieve
        overall urban and rural development in the suburbs >>



      以新城、核心镇、中心镇为引领，
      划分 16 个综合发展型城镇圈
                                                                   16个 综合发展
                                                                       型城镇圈
                                                                   Comprehensively developed
      5个 以新城为引领，分别为嘉定、                                             town clusters
      青浦、松江、奉贤、南汇城镇圈。
      2个以核心镇为引领，分别为金山
                                                      4个 生态主导
                                                         型城镇圈             4个 整合提升
                                                                             型城镇圈
                                                      ecology-dominated   Integrated and
      滨海地区和崇明城桥地区。                                    town clusters       promoted town clusters
      9个以中心镇为引领，分别为长
      兴、枫泾、朱泾、安亭、亭林、奉
                                           规划形成24个城镇圈 Plan to establish 24 town clusters.
      城、海湾、惠南、罗店。


      对于主城区周边城市化较高的地区，划分 4 个整合提升型城镇圈
      具体包括南翔 - 江桥、九亭 - 泗泾－洞泾－新桥、浦江 - 周浦 - 康桥 - 航头、唐镇－曹路 -
      合庆等城镇圈。

      以提升城乡基本公共服务为指向，划分 4 个生态主导型城镇圈
      包括陈家镇、东平、新海、朱家角等城镇圈。

      促进跨行政区城镇圈统筹发展
      加强规划共同研究编制，实现功能布局和基础设施统筹融合，推动上海和近沪地区一体化
      发展。

      Divide 16 comprehensively developed town clusters led by new cities, core towns
      and central towns
      Led by 5 new cities, i.e. Jiading, Qingpu, Songjiang, Fengxian and Nanhui town cluster,
      respectively
      Led by 2 core towns, i.e. Binhai area in Jinshan and Chengqiao area in Chongming,
      respectively
      Led by 9 central towns, i.e. Changxing, Fengjing, Zhujing, Anting, Tinglin, Fengcheng,
      Haiwan, Huinan and Luodian, respectively
      Divide 4 integrated and promoted town clusters in the surrounding highly urban-
      ized areas of the main city
      Such areas specifically include Nanxiang-Jiangqiao, Jiuting-Sijing-Dongjing-Xinqiao, Pu-
      jiang-Zhoupu-Kangqiao-Hangtou, Tangzhen-Caolu-Heqing and other town clusters

      Divide 4 ecology-dominated town circles to improve basic public services in urban
      and rural areas
      Such areas include Chenjia Town, Dongping, Xinhai, Zhujiajiao and other town clusters

      Advance overall development of cross-district town clusters
      The efforts include strengthening joint research and formulation of plans, achieving
      overall integration of functional layout and infrastructure, and promoting integrated
      development of Shanghai and places near Shanghai.


41｜
上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域城镇圈规划｜
Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Town Cluster Plan |




                                                                ｜42
      第三部分
      Part II

      共同的行动
      共同的家园
      COMMON ACTION
      COMMON HOME
        更具活力的创新之城
        A More Dynamic Innovation City


        更富魅力的人文之城
        A More Attractive Humanistic City


        更可持续发展的生态之城
        A More Sustainable Eco-City




43｜
｜44
                更具活力的创新之城
                A More Dynamic Innovation City


      >> Enhance Shanghai’s Core Function to Build a Global City

         向具有全球影响力的科技创新中心进军，充分激发全社会创新创业活力和动力，营造
         激发创新活力的制度环境。
         To strive for becoming a science and technology center with global influence, fully
         stimulate the vitality and impetus towards innovation and entrepreneurship
         across the society, and create an institutional environment triggering innovation
         vigor.

         提升全球经济辐射力，提高国际金融功能影响力，增强国际贸易服务辐射能级、商务
         设施的品质和集聚度。
         To step up the global economic radiation force, boost the influence of the city’ s
         financial function worldwide, and enhance the radiation level of international
         trade, and the quality and agglomeration of business facilities.

         扩大国际文化影响力，塑造国际文化大都市品牌和城市整体形象，推进高等级公共服
         务设施建设，建设世界著名旅游目的地城市，提升城市的旅游吸引力。
         To expand the city’ s global cultural influence, build the brand of an international
         cultural metropolis and the city’ s integral image, promote development of
         high-grade public service facilities, build the city into a globally renowned tourist
         destination and enhance its tourism attraction.

         保障先进制造业发展，将承载国家战略功能、具有一定规模或对周边地区具有一定影
         响的先进制造产业基地予以长期锁定。
         To guarantee the development of advanced manufacturing industries and target
         those advanced manufacturing industry bases bearing a strategic national func-
         tion and boasting a certain scale or having certain effect on the surrounding areas
         for a long term.

         有力疏解城市非核心功能，坚持政府引导与市场机制相结合，逐步推动城市非核心功
         能向郊区以及更大区域范围疏解。加强长三角区域基础设施一体化建设，推动错位竞
         争、优势互补。
         To vigorously remove the non-core urban functions, adhere to the integration of
         government guidance and market mechanism, and gradually move the non-core
         urban functions to suburbs and a greater regional scope. To enhance integrated
         development of infrastructure in the Yangtze River Delta, promote differentiated
         competition and complement each other’ s advantages.




45｜
                      培育若干世界一流大学，形成一批世界一流学科，鼓励高校或开放型大
                      学和新城、城市副中心联动发展，每个新城、城市副中心至少有一所大学。
    高等级               Develop world-class universities and world-class disciplines, encour-
   教育设施               age institutions of higher education or open universities to conduct
  High-grade
  educational         integrated development with new cities and city sub-centers, each of
   facilities         which shall have at least one university.



                      每 10 万人拥有 2.5 个以上演出场馆、6 个以上美术馆或画廊、1.5 个以
                      上各类博物馆和 4 个以上图书馆。
    高等级
   文化设施               For every 100 thousand citizens, there will be more than 2.5 theatres,
  High-grade          6 galleries, 1.5 museums and 4 libraries.
cultural facilities




                      全市专业足球场数 5-10 个，预留高等级专项体育场馆和训练基地。
    高等级
   体育设施               Municipality-wide 5-10 professional football stadiums; reserved
  High-grade          high-grade special sports venues and training bases.
sports facilities




                      在虹桥、浦东等地区打造医疗功能集聚区，每个新城至少有一处三甲综
                      合医院、一处三级专科医院。
    高等级               Medical functional agglomeration areas built in Hongqiao, Pudong,
   医疗设施
                      etc.; At least 1 first-class grade-3 general hospital and 1 third-class
  High-grade
medical facilities    specialized hospital in each new city.




                                                                                                ｜46
      >> 建设更开放的国际枢纽
      >> Develop a More Open International Hub

      提高上海国际国内两个扇面的服务辐射能力，提升海港、空港、铁路等国际门户地位。
      Enhance Shanghai’ s international and domestic service radiating power, and promote its
      stance as an international hub via its ports, airports and railway.


          强化亚太航空门户枢纽地位，至 2035 年上海航空枢纽设计年客运吞吐能力 1.8 亿人
          次左右，货邮运量 650 万吨左右。提升浦东、虹桥机场保障能力。
          Consolidate the city’s position as an Asia-Pacific airline gateway. By 2035, the
          designed passenger throughput at Shanghai aviation hub will be over 180 million
          person-times, and air cargo & mail will be over 6.5 million tons. The supporting
          capacity of Shanghai Pudong International Airport and Shanghai Hongqiao Interna-
          tional Airport will be enhanced.

          推动国际海港枢纽功能升级，以洋山深水港区、外高桥港区为核心，杭州湾、崇明三
          岛港区为补充，强化高端航运服务功能，突出江海联运，水水中转比例达到 55% 以上。
          Upgrade the city’s function as an international sea hub. The high-end shipping
          service function revolving around Yangshan Deepwater Port and Waigaoqiao Port
          Area will be strengthened with Hangzhou Bay, and the port area of three islands of
          Chongming serving as the supplementary arms to highlight river-ocean combined
          transportation featuring over 55% of water-water transfer.

          增强铁路枢纽辐射服务能力，强化上海铁路枢纽作为国家铁路网主枢纽的地位，实现
          铁路运输占对外客运比例达到 65% 左右。
          Improve the radiating service capability as a railway hub. Shanghai railway hub
          will be enhanced as a main hub of national railway network to fulfill that railway
          transportation amounts to approximately 65% external passenger transportation.

          提升信息通信枢纽服务水平，强化全球通信枢纽服务功能，打造全球先进的信息通信
          网络，提升大数据云计算服务能力。
          Enhance the city’s service level as an information communication center. The
          service function of the global communication center will be enhanced，a globally
          advanced information communication network will be created and the service
          capability of big data cloud computing will be improved.




47｜
强化综合运输廊道建设，促进区域交通一体化。
Strengthen construction of comprehensive transportation corridors to promote regional
transportation integration.


    构建以铁路为主导、多种方式综合支撑的对外交通网络。形成南京、杭州、南通、宁波、
    湖州等 5 个主要联系方向，强化沪宁、沪杭、沿江、沪通、沪湖、沿湾、沪甬等七条
    区域综合运输走廊的服务效率、能级和安全可靠性，实现与近沪城市之间 90 分钟左
    右可达。
    Build an external traffic network dominated by railway and comprehensively
    supported by multiple other means. 5 major linkage directions (i.e. Nanjing,
    Hangzhou, Nantong, Ningbo and Huzhou) will be formed to strengthen the service
    efficiency, energy level and safety reliability of seven regional comprehensive trans-
    portation corridors (i.e. Shanghai-Nanjing, Shanghai-Hangzhou, region along the
    Yangtze River, Shanghai-Nantong, Shanghai-Huzhou, regions along Hangzhou Bay
    and Shanghai-Ningbo), and shorten the time of travelling between Shanghai and
    neighboring cities to within 90 minutes.




                                                                                             ｜48
      >> 构筑“安全、便捷、绿色、高效、经济”的综合交通体系
      >> Build a Comprehensive Transportation System that is “Safe, Con-
      venient, Green, Efficient and Economic”

      突出公共交通主体地位，加强市域轨道交通网络布局
      Highlight the dominance of public transportation and strengthen the layout of munic-
      ipal rail transit network


          为支撑和引导城镇体系的优化并带动重要地区集聚发展，完善以多模式轨道交通为主
          导的公交优先策略，规划形成“一张网、多模式、全覆盖、高集约”的公交网络，建
          成各 1000 公里以上的城际线、市区线、局域线。
          In order to support and guide the optimization of urban system, drive agglomera-
          tion development of key areas, and to improve the strategy of public transport pri-
          ority which is dominated by multimode rail transit, it is planned to form a “one-net-
          worked, multimodal, fully covered and highly intensive” public transportation net-
          work, and build intercity lines, urban lines and regional lines in a length of more
          than 1,000km each.


                   强化新城与主城区快速联系，规划 9 条主城区联系新城、核心镇、中心镇及近沪城
                   镇的射线。
                   Strengthen rapid connection between new cities and main city, and plan 9
                   radial routes connecting the main city with new cities, core towns, central
                   towns and those near Shanghai.

                   强化两场之间的快速联系，规划联系浦东机场和虹桥机场的联络线。
                   Strengthen rapid connection between the two airports, and plan to connect
                   the transfer line between Shanghai Pudong International Airport and Shang-
                   hai Hongqiao International Airport.

                   强化新城与核心镇和中心镇之间的联系，基本实现 10 万人以上新市镇轨道交通
                   站点全覆盖。
                   Strengthen connection among new city, core towns and central towns, and
                   basically realize full coverage of rail transit stations in new towns with more
                   than 100,000 persons.

                   提高中心城轨道交通服务水平，加密中心城北部、东部地区的轨道交通网络，在中
                   环附近预留城市轨道环线条件，增强沿黄浦江等主要客运走廊的轨道交通服务功
                   能，确保主城副中心均有至少 2 条轨道交通线路直接服务。
                   Enhance service of rail transit in the inner areas of the main city, increase
                   density of rail transit network in the northern and eastern parts of the inner
                   areas of the main city, reserve conditions for urban rail loop lines near the
                   middle ring, enhance rail transit service function of major passenger trans-
                   portation corridors along the Huangpu River, etc., and ensure to have at least
                   2 rail transit lines directly serving each sub-center of the inner areas of the
                   main city.

49｜
   76%          85%           32%         60%
   2015         2035          2015        2035


                                     TERMINAL




提高中心城公共交通服务水平
至2035年，中心城公共交通出行占全出行方式比例的50%左右，绿色交通出行比
例达到85%，中心城轨道交通站点600米用地面积覆盖率达到60%。

Improve the service of public transportation in the inner areas of the
main city
By 2035, the public transportation will account for over 50% of all means of transporta-
tion; green transportation will account for 85%; and 60% rail transit stations in the inner
areas of the main city will have 600m land coverage.




                                                                                              ｜50
      多模式公共交通网络
      Multimodal Public Transportation Network




                                                                                                           Town cluster


                                                            Town cluster




                                      Intercity railway
                                                                             Town cluster
                                          Regional (municipal) line
                                   Urban line
                                   Local line                                                              Town cluster
                                       Backbone public transportation line
                                  Main city
                                  New city
                                  New town
                                    Main hub




                            系统模式                                功能定位                          设计速度（km/h）              平均站距（km） 规划里程（km）
                                                                                             Designed Speed (km/h)    Average Stop     Planned
                          System Model                    Functional Orientation                                       Spacing (km)   Distance (km)

                             城际铁路                服务于主城区与新城及近沪城镇、新城之
                             市域铁路                间的快速、中长距离联系，并兼顾主要新
                             轨道快线                市镇。
                                                 S er ve fast connec tion and medi-
         城际线                                     um-and- long-distance connection                                                     1000以上
                       Intercity railway,                                                        100-250                   3-20
                       municipal railway         among the main city, new cities and                                                   Over 1,000
      Intercity lines and express railway        towns near Shanghai and among new
                                                 cities, and simultaneously support the
                                                 major new towns
                                                 服务高度密集发展的主城区，满足大运
                                                 量、高频率和高可靠性的公交服务。
                               地铁
                                                 Serve intensively developed main city
                             Subway              and meet the public transportation                  80                    1-2
                                                 service requirement for large traffic
                                                 volume, high frequency and high
                                                 reliability                                                                          1000以上
         市区线
                                                 服务于较高程度密集发展的主城区次级客                                                                    Over 1,000
      Municipal lines
                               轻轨                运走廊，与地铁共同构成市区轨道网络。
                          Light railway          Serve secondary passenger transpor-               60-80                  0.6-1.2
                                                 tation corridors in the intensively
                                                 developed main city, and form the mu-
                                                 nicipal rail network with subways

                              现代                 作为大容量快速轨道交通的补充和接驳，
         局域线                 有轨电车                或服务局域地区客运走廊，提升局域公交
                                                 服务水平。
                            胶轮系统等                                                                                                     1000以上
        Local lines                              Serve as the supplement and connec-                                      0.5-0.8
                         Modern tramcar          tion of high-capacity rapid rail transit,             -
                        Rubber-tired transit                                                                                           Over 1,000
                                                 or serve the local passenger transpor-
                           system etc.           tation corridors to improve service of
                                                 local public transportation

51｜
上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域干线道路系统规划｜
Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Municipality-wide Arterial Road System Plan |




                                                                                          ｜52
      >> 营造更具吸引力的就业创业环境
      >> Create a More Attractive Environment for Both Employment and
      Entrepreneurship

          优化就业岗位结构和布局
            拓展高端人才就业规模，强化现代服务业的就业吸引力，提升新兴产业就业岗位，
            逐步淘汰劳动密集型的低端制造业，增加高技术就业岗位。
            引导就业岗位的均衡布局，主城区疏解非核心功能及相应的就业岗位，郊区城镇加
            强就业集聚度。打造职住平衡的产业社区，形成二三产融合发展、配套功能完善、
            环境景观宜人的产业社区。
          Optimize the structure and layout of jobs
            Expand the employment for high-caliber talents, enhance attraction in the
            modern service industry, add jobs of the emerging industries, phase out
            low-end labor-intensive manufacturing industry, and add more technology
            intensive jobs.
            Guide balanced distribution of jobs, remove non-core functions and corre-
            sponding positions in the main city and enhance employment agglomeration in
            suburban towns. Build industrial communities featuring job-living balance, and
            develop industrial communities characterized by an integrated development of
            secondary and tertiary industries, complete supporting functions and agreeable
            environment and landscape.


          促进中小微企业发展
            提供宽松灵活的产业发展空间，完善公共服务扶持政策，为中小微企业提供创业、
            创新、融资、咨询、培训、人才等专业化服务。
          Advance development of SMEs and micro business
            Provide liberal and flexible space for industry development, improve the sup-
            porting policies for public service, and provide medium, small and micro-sized
            enterprises with entrepreneurial, innovation, financing, consulting, training, tal-
            ents and other professional services.


          提供鼓励人才成长的环境
            通过实行租购并举，为青年群体提供可负担的住房，完善公共服务配套和环境品质，
            以便捷舒适的生活环境提高对青年人才的吸引力。
            加强劳动力职业技能教育和培训，营造汇聚人才的政策环境。
          Provide the environment encouraging the talent growth
            Implement system encouraging both renting and purchase to offer affordable
            housing to younger group; improve supporting facilities for public service and
            environmental quality so as to make them more attractive to young talents, and
            provide a convenient and conformable living environment.
            Strengthen vocational-technical education and training, and create a policy en-
            vironment to pool talents.


53｜
｜54
                 更富魅力的人文之城
                 A More Attractive Humanistic City

      >> Create a 15-Minute Community Living Circle

      Develop an affordable and sustainable housing supply system



          提倡租购并举。加大新建住宅中租赁住房的配建比重。
          Advocate an approach encouraging renting and purchase. Increase the proportions
          for rent among newly built residential buildings.


          多渠道筹措保障性住房。完善“四位一体”（包括廉租住房、共有产权保障住房、公共
          租赁住房和征收安置住房）的住房保障体系。至 2035 年，全市保障性住房套数占全
          市住房总套数的比例达到 8%-10%。
          Arrange social housing via multiple channels. Complete the “four in one” housing
          guarantee system (i.e. low-rent housing, public rental housing, common property
          rights housing and resettlement housing). By 2035, low-income housing will ac-
          count for 8%-10% of all housing across the city.


          满足市民多层次、多样化的住房需求。根据不同人群的需要，提供人才公寓、国际化社区、
          适老性住宅等。
          Meet residents’ need for multilevel and diversified housing. Supply talent apart-
          ments, globalized communities and houses for the elderly based on the needs of
          different groups.


          推进老旧住宅的可持续使用。持续改善老旧住区的住房条件、服务设施和居住环境，加
          强各类住房的修缮和维护，实现老旧住宅持续使用、城市住区有机更新和社区文脉的有
          序传承。
         Advance sustainable use of old residential houses. Continuously improve housing
         conditions, service facilities and living environments in old communities, and en-
         hance the repair and maintenance of various houses, to fulfill the sustainable use of
         old residential houses with organic renewal of urban communities and systematic
         inheritance of community cultural pulse.




55｜
                         400平方米以上的公园和广场
                         5分钟步行可达率90%左右
      公园
                         Parks and squares covering over 400 m2
     Parks
                         90% within 5 minutes’ walking distance


                         4 平方米 / 人的社区公共空间
                         包括社区公园、小广场、街角绿地等，实现人均4平方米的规划目标
                         4 m2 community public space per capita
   公共空间
                         Achieve planning goal of 4 m2 per capita, including community parks,
 Public space
                         small squares, and street-corner green areas


                         15分钟步行
                         社区公共服务设施15分钟可达覆盖率达到99%左右
   公共设施                  15 minutes’ walking distance
Public facilities        99% public facilities within a 15-minute walking distance in communities



                         2.5 公里
                         生活性平均出行距离控制在2.5公里以内
      出行                 2.5 km
                         Average travel distance for the daily life needs will be limited to 2.5 km
     Travel




        全年龄段一站式的生活服务                            复合社区                            多样化、可负担的住房
       One-stop life service for all         Complex community                     Diversified and
        agesOne-stop life service
                                                                                 affordable housing
              for all ages                   15分钟日常生活圈
                                              15-minute daily
                                                living circle
                 活力开放的交往空间                                               就业、创业和学习的成长环境
             Viable and open space for                                  Environment of employment,
                   socialization                                       entrepreneurship and education
                                                                          for people’s development

                                               安全舒适的街道出行
                                             Safe and comfortable
                                                stroll on streets




                                                                                                        ｜56
        Perfect a fair, shared, flexible and inclusive basic public service system


      构筑全覆盖均等化的基本公共服务体系，让所有市民都能在有助于健康活力生活的社区居住、
      工作、学习和锻炼。各类社区公共服务设施与场地将更加开放、服务效率更高、服务机制更加
      完善。
      提供覆盖全年龄段的公共服务保障，完善社区图书馆、文化活动室、市民健身中心、老年学校、
      青少年培训中心等多样化的文化设施建设，完善社区卫生服务中心和服务卫生点，提升社区公
      共服务设施对青少年的开放度和利用率。
      建设老年友好型城市，建设和改造一批适老性住宅，优化形成以家庭自我照顾为基础、社区居
      家养老服务为依托、机构养老服务为支撑、医养相结合的养老服务格局。



      Build a full-coverage, equalized basic public service system: Ensure all residents can live,
      work, study, and do physical exercise in the communities beneficial to live a healthy and
      vibrant life. Public service facilities and venues in various communities will be more open
      and provide more efficient services based on a more fledged service mechanism.
      Provide public service assurances covering all ages: Improve construction of diversified
      cultural facilities such as community libraries, cultural activity rooms, citizens’ fitness centers,
      schools for the aged and training centers for teenagers, improve community health service
      centers, service hygiene points, and encourage more openness and utilization of communi-
      ty public service facilities for teenagers .
      Build an elderly-friendly city: Construct and renovate a group of houses for the elderly, form
      and optimize a pension service model founded on family self-care, relying on home-based
      care program in community, and supported by institutional care program as well as medi-
      cal-nursing combined care concept.




57｜
Optimize the environment for community life, employment and commuting



  城镇社区生活圈                                                     乡村社区生活圈
  Urban community living circle                               Rural community living circle
  配备基本服务功能与公共活动空间，设置社                                         集中配置符合农村生活生产特点的各类服
  区中心作为综合服务和公共活动中心。                                           务设施，提升公共服务水平。
  Provide basic service functions and public activ-           Focus on providing all sorts of service facili-
  ity spaces; set up community centers as centers             ties based on characteristics of rural life and
  for comprehensive service and public activities.            production, and improve public service.




建设 TOD 社区，依托轨道交通站点、公                                  营造 24 小时运营的社区，保证市民能够
交枢纽等空间，综合设置各类社区公共                                     享受更长时间的公共服务、交通出行和夜
服务设施。                                                 间健身环境。
Establish TOD communities and provide all             Create full-time operating communities to ensure
sorts of community public service facilities in       that citizens may enjoy longer public services, public
an all-round way based on railway stations,           transportation and night fitness environment.
public transportation hubs and other spaces.




提供社区学习、就业和创业机会，增设                                     形成有归属感的社区交往空间，以社区生
各类社区学校。                                               活圈为平台，构建网络化、无障碍的公共
Provide opportunities for community study,            活动网络。
employment and entrepreneurship, and add              Develop community-based public spaces with
all kinds of community schools.                       sense of belonging.




                                                                                                                ｜58
      >> 加强历史文化遗产保护
      >> Strengthen Conservation of Historical and Cultural Heritage



      Enhance overall protection of urban and rural historical sites

      上海是我国近现代历史文化遗产最丰富的城市之一，1986 年被国务院正式公布为国家
      历史文化名城。面向 2035 年，上海将加强对历史城区的整体保护，积极保护历史城镇
      与历史村落，并在旧区改造和城中村改造过程中采取多种手段开展抢救性保护工作。

      Shanghai is one of the cities lavishly endowed with historical and cultural heritages in
      modern and contemporary China. State Council officially announced Shanghai as a nation-
      al famous historical and cultural city in 1986.In the face of upcoming 2035, Shanghai will
      enhance overall protection of its historical urban areas, actively protect historical towns
      and villages, and employ multiple methods to rescue and protect such sites in the process
      of old city zone renovation and urban village renewal.



                         历史城镇、历史村落一览表                            List of Historical Towns and Villages

                保护类型                                                         基本情况
               Protection Type                                              Basic Information

            中国历史文化名镇                            枫泾、朱家角、新场、嘉定、练塘、张堰、高桥、南翔、金泽、川沙等
           Famous historical and                Fengjing, Zhujiajiao, Xinchang, Jiading, Liantang, Zhangyan, Gaoqiao,
          cultural towns in China                                   Nanxiang, Jinze, Chuansha, etc.
            上海历史文化名镇                                                      松江区松江城厢镇
          Famous historical and                                 Chengxiang Town, Songjiang District
        cultural town in Shanghais
                风貌特色镇                                          娄塘、徐泾、庄行、六灶、大团、堡镇等
            Towns with special                     Loutang, Xujing, Zhuanghang, Liuzao, Datuan, Baozhen, etc.
              local features
            中国历史文化名村                                          松江泗泾镇下塘村、闵行区浦江镇革新村等
          Famous historical and       Xiatang Village, Sijing Town, Songjiang; Gexin Village, Pujiang Town, Minhang District, etc.
         cultural villages in China
                                         松江泗泾镇下塘村、闵行区浦江镇革新村、马桥镇彭渡村、宝山区罗店镇东南弄村、
              中国传统村落                                   浦东新区康桥镇青村等
           Traditional Chinese          Xiatang Village, Sijing Town, Songjiang; Gexin Village, Pujiang Town, Minhang District;
                 villages                 Pengdu Village, Maqiao Town; East Dongnan Long Village, Luodian Town, Baoshan
                                                     District; Qing Village, Kangqiao Town, Pudong New Area, etc.
               风貌特色村                                                             40个
           Villages with special                                               40 villages
               local features




59｜
Expand range of protected historical and cultural heritages
在已划定历史文化保护对象的基础上，增加风貌保护街坊、风貌河道等保护类型，增
补里弄住宅、工业遗存、工人新村、传统校园、历史公园等文物和各类历史建筑，加
强保护代表上海地方文化的非物质文化遗产以及历史记忆、社会生活等非物质要素。

Based on currently defined protected historical and cultural objects, increase
protected object ranges such as conserved street blocks and waterways with
distinct features, add and supplement Shanghai Li-long residential housing, indus-
trial relics, residential quarters for workers, traditional campuses, historical parks,
other cultural relics and various historical buildings; enhance protection of intangi-
ble cultural heritage representing Shanghai’s local culture, historical memories,
social life and other non-physical elements.




Create a new historical and cultural conservation mechanism
建立保护对象常态化增补机制，完善分级分类保护更新机制，加强历史资源活化利用，
完善历史保护的政策配套与支撑，适时申报世界文化遗产。
Establish regular supplementing mechanism for protected objects, perfect hierar-
chical classification mechanism for protection and renewal, enhance revitalization
of historical resources, improve historical protection policies and support, and
promptly apply to declare them as world cultural heritage sites.




                                                                                          ｜60
      上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域历史文化保护规划｜
      Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Municipality-wide Historical and Cultural Protection Plan |




61｜
>> 塑造国际化大都市和江南水乡风貌特色
>> Build an International Metropolis with Featured Jiangnan Water
Towns


     保护“江海山岛”自然生态基底、保护河口冲积型和水乡聚落型自然文化景观，延续
     依水而建、临水而居的江南水乡传统村镇模式，形成“拥江面海、枕湖依岛、河网交织、
     水田共生”的自然山水格局。

     Protect natural landscape
     Protect the natural ecological base of “river, sea, mountain and island” , protect
     the estuary-alluvial and waterside-settled natural and cultural landscapes, main-
     tain the traditional water town model by building houses and living along water-
     ways in the region south of the Yangtze River, and develop natural landscapes
     dotted with lakes and islands, sitting along the river and facing the sea and featur-
     ing interwoven network of watercourses and paddy fields.




     加强城市门户和标志景观设计，打造具有全球城市都会感的门户形象，构建襟海临江
     的大尺度开放空间，突出公共活动中心、滨水凸岸、河流交汇处、视线廊道焦点、人
     流聚集区等区域的空间景观设计。
     塑造城市空间轴线和景观廊道，在黄浦江、苏州河等主要景观河道两岸以及大型开敞
     空间周边，形成优美的天际线。提升线性路径两侧的界面景观，严格控制南北高架和
     延安高架两侧的建筑和环境元素。
     形成小尺度、人性化的城市空间肌理，加强传统街坊格局和空间肌理延续，按照街道
     功能和人性化要求，强化对城市街坊尺度与规模的控制，通过加密路网，将街坊尺度
     控制在适宜的步行距离之内。

     Build urban landscape features
     Enhance the landscape design of urban gateways and landmarks. Create a
     gateway image that all global cities have, build large open spaces near the sea and
     rivers, highlight the design of spatial landscape in public activity centers, water-
     front banks, river intersections, focal points of view corridors and areas where
     people gather.
     Plan urban spatial axis and scenic corridors. Form beautiful skylines on both
     sides of Huangpu River, Suzhou Creek and other landscape rivers, and around large
     open spaces. Improve the interface landscapes on both sides of linear paths and
     strictly control architectural and environmental elements on both sides of
     South-North Viaduct and Yan’an Road Viaduct.
     Develop small, human-oriented urban spatial fabric. Strengthen the continuity
     of traditional street block patterns and spatial textile, escalate control over the size
     and scale of urban street blocks based on street functions and human-centric
     requirements, and control street block sizes within appropriate walking distances
     by increasing the road network density.



                                                                                                ｜62
      建设便利可达、人性化、多样性的公共空间。郊野地区增加区域公园，主城区、新城
      增加广场、公园等公共开放空间，积极推动各类附属开放空间对外开放。

      推进“通江达海”的蓝网绿道建设。加强滨海及骨干河道两侧生态廊道建设，修复生
      态岸线。建成以 226 条河道为主干的水绿交融的河道空间，形成市域蓝色网络。形
      成总长度 2000 公里左右的骨干绿道，承载市民健身休闲等功能。

      塑造安全、绿色、活力、智慧的街道空间。全面关注人的交流和生活方式转变，加强
      街道空间管控，推动街道整体空间环境设计，促进城市街区发展。

      提升公共空间文化艺术内涵。美化城市“第五立面”，在公共活动密集地区、加强屋顶、
      平台等空间的绿化建设和公共开放利用。优化沿街建筑界面设计和景观要素的整体规
      划，塑造高品质且特色鲜明的空间环境。


      Build a high quality public space network
      Build easily accessible, humanistic and diversified public space. New regional
      parks will be constructed in the suburbs, and new squares, parks and other public
      open spaces will be built in the main city and new cities. Efforts will also be made
      to proactively provide various associated open space to the public.
      Advance construction of blue ribbon and greenway that connects to the river
      and the sea. Efforts will be made to step up the construction of an ecological cor-
      ridor by the sea and both sides of trunk watercourses, and to restore the ecology
      along the coastal line. An integrated water-greenery watercourse space that cen-
      ters on 226 watercourses will be built to develop an urban blue network. An 2000
      km main greenway will also be constructed, where residents may do physical ex-
      ercises or entertain themselves.
      Build safe, green, dynamic and smart street space. Fully focus on changes in
      people’s communication and lifestyle; efforts will be made to strengthen manage-
      ment and control of street space and promote its integrated spatial and environ-
      mental design, so as to push forward urban street block development.
      Improve cultural and artistic connotations of public space. Efforts will be
      made to beautify the “fifth facade” of the city; the roof, terrace and other space in
      high public activity areas will be provided with more greenery and be more open
      to the public; the street faced facade and landscaping element of buildings along
      the streets shall be optimized in terms of overall planning to create a high quality
      space environment with distinctive characteristics.




63｜
            更可持续发展的生态之城
            A More Sustainable Eco-City

>> Prioritize eco-city development and set an example for low-carbon
development
扩大市域生态空间，优化生态格局。
对接区域生态系统，构建“双环、九廊、十区”多层次、成网络、功能复合的市域生态空间体系，建设
崇明世界级生态岛。至 2035 年，全市森林覆盖率达到 23% 左右，人均公园绿地面积力争达到
13 平方米，河湖水面率不低于 10.5% 左右。

Expand municipality-wide ecological space, and optimize the ecological pattern
An municipality-wide ecological spatial system characterized by multi-layers, network
layout and integrated functions will be built to cover “two rings, nine corridors and ten
zones” on the basis of connecting with regional ecological system. Efforts will also be made
to build Chongming Island into a world-class eco-island. By 2035, there will be 23% forest
coverage throughout the city, the park space per capita will be 13m2 and the water surface
ratio of rivers and lakes will be 10.5%.

   完善市域生态环廊 Improve municipality-wide ecological corridors

   郊区，形成嘉宝、嘉青、青松、黄浦江、大治河、金奉、浦奉、金汇港、崇明等9条宽度
   1000米以上的生态廊道以及宝山、嘉定、青浦、黄浦江上游、金山、奉贤西、奉贤东、
   奉贤-临港、浦东、崇明等10个生态保育区，作为生态战略保障空间。
   Suburbs: build 9 ecological corridors over 1000m wide at Jiading-Baoshan, Jiad-
   ing-Qingpu, Qingsong, Huangpu River, Dazhi River, Jinshan-Fengxian, Pudong-Fengx-
   ia, Jianghuigang and Chongming, and 10 ecological conservation zones at Baoshan,
   Jiading, Qingpu, upstream of Huangpu River, Jinshan, West Fengxian, East Fengxian,
   Fengxian-Lingang, Pudong and Chongming, as the strategic ecological guarantee
   space.

   主城区，形成近郊绿环和顾村杨行、嘉宝、沪宁铁路、吴淞江、沪渝高速、淀浦河、沪杭铁路、
   申嘉湖、吴泾、黄浦江、浦闵、外环运河、川杨河、张家浜、赵家沟、滨江等 16 条宽度 100 米
   以上的生态间隔带。
   Main city: build 16 ecological spaced belts over 100m wide at suburban green ring,
   Gucun-Yanghang, Jiading-Baoshan, Shanghai-Nanjing Railway, Wusong River, Shang-
   hai-Chongqing Expressway, Dianpu River, Shanghai-Hangzhou Railway, Shanghai-Ji-
   axing-Huzhou Expressway, Wujing, Huangpu River, Pudong-Minhang, canal by the
   outer ring, Chuanyang River, Zhangjiabang River, Zhaojiagou, Riversides and other
   places.




                                                                                               ｜64
      建设城乡公园体系 Establish an urban-rural park system

      建设以国家公园、郊野公园（区域公园）、城市公园、地区公园、社区公园为主体的城乡公园
      体系。至 2035 年，全市人均公园绿地力争达到 13 平方米。
      Establish an urban-rural park system that centers on national parks, country parks
      (regional parks), urban parks, local parks and community parks. By 2035, the park
      space per capita throughout the city will be up to 13m2.



      中心城织密绿地网络 Develop interwoven green land network in the IMC


      人均公园绿地面积实现倍增（由现状3.8平方米/
      人增加到7.6平方米/人）。增加若干个面积达1平                                             7.6
                                                            3.8            2035
      方公里的城市公园，针灸式增加微型公园。                                   2015

      Park space per capita will be doubled (increas-
      ing from the present 3.8 m 2 /person to 7.6
      m2/person). Several new urban parks with area
      up to 1 km2 will be built with miniature parks
      added in an acupuncture method.




65｜
上海市城市总体规划2017-2035 ｜上海市域生态网络规划｜
Shanghai Master Plan 2017-2035 | Shanghai Municipality-wide Ecological Network Planning |




                                                                                            ｜66
      >> 守护城市安全，建设韧性城市
      >> Safeguard city security and build a resilient city

      加大海洋、大气、水、土壤环境的保护力度
      Enhance protection of marine, atmospheric, water and soil environment


                    推进海洋自然保护区建设，加强陆源入海污染物控制，加强海域、海岛、海岸带
                    整治修复，保护海洋环境安全。
       海洋环境         Facilitate construction of marine natural reserves to enhance control over
        Marine      land-based pollutants entering the sea, strengthen the remediation of sea areas,
      environment
                    islands and coastal zones, and protect the marine environment


                    推动区域大气环境联防联治，改善城市大气环境，力争2035年PM2.5浓度控制
                    在25微克/立方米左右。
       大气环境
                    Promote joint protection and control of atmospheric environment to im-
      Atmospheric   prove urban atmospheric environment, with an aim to control PM25 at around
      environment   25mcg/m3 by 2035.


                     高度聚焦水环境改善，进一步提高水系连通性，提升城乡水体生态功能，实现水
                    （环境）功能区基本达标。
                    Highly concentrate on water environment improvement to further enhance
        水环境         the connectivity of water system and improve urban-rural water ecology, en-
         Water      abling the water (environment) functional area to basically reach the standard.
      environment




                    加强对土壤污染的监测、修复和控制，至2035年，受污染耕地安全利用率
                    达到100%，污染地块安全利用率达到100%。
       土壤环境
                    Strengthen monitoring, restoration and control of soil pollution. By 2035,
          Soil
      environment   utilization rate of both polluted farmland and polluted land will reach 100%.




67｜
   主动应对全球气候变化，提升城市抵御自然灾害能力
   Cope with global climate change, and ramp up the city's resilience to
   natural disasters


推动绿色低碳发展。通过优化能源结构，降低产业和建筑能耗，引导绿色交通出行，全面
降低碳排放。全市碳排放总量和人均碳排放于 2025 年达到峰值，至 2035 年控制碳排
放总量较峰值减少 5% 左右，提高可再生能源占一次能源供应的比例，新建建筑绿色建
筑达标率 100%。
Promote green and low-carbon development. The energy structure will be opti-
mized to reduce industrial and building energy consumption while green transpor-
tation will be encouraged to comprehensively reduce carbon emissions. The total
carbon emissions of the entire city and carbon emissions per capita will reach the
peak by 2025. By 2035, the total carbon emissions will be reduced by about 5% of
the peak value, the proportion of renewable energy resources in primary energy
sources will be increased, and all (100%) newly-built buildings will reach the stan-
dards for green building.


应对海平面上升。加强“海绵城市”建设，提高防汛除涝能力，建立全市覆盖、重点地区加
密的地面沉降、地下水环境专项监测网络，继续提高地面沉降监测与防治能力。
Respond to rising sea level. Improve the construction of “Sponge City” to en-
hance flood control and drainage; build a dedicated network for monitoring sur-
face subsidence and underground water environment throughout the city, and en-
hance monitoring in key areas; and continue to improve the capability to monitor,
prevent and control surface subsidence.


缓解极端气候影响和城市热岛效应。通过加强各类建筑的升级改造和生命线工程的维护
和保障，应对不断变化的气候影响。强化社区、社会和经济韧性，提升社区层面主动应对
极端气候的能力。建设并控制风道空间，引入自然风，缓解城市热岛效应。
Mitigate extreme climate effect and urban heat island effect. Enhance the up-
grade and reconstruction of various buildings, and the maintenance and protec-
tion of life-saving engineering to cope with the changing climate effect; improve
community, society and economy's resilience to enhance the capability to respond
to extreme climate at the community level; construct and control air ducts to intro-
duce natural air, so as to mitigate urban heat island effect.




                                                                                       ｜68
          强化城市能源、水资源供应安全
          Reinforce supply security of urban energy and water resources


      保障城市能源供给安全。完善市外来电供应格局，根据需要继续发展完善市内电源点。
      积极争取天然气新气源，主动参与国家气源引进和通道工程建设。推进分布式能源建
      设，实现城市能源供应方式的多元化、规模化应用。

      Safeguard supply security of urban energy. Power supply points within the city
      will be developed and perfected continuously as required while the external
      power supply is improved. Efforts will also be made to acquire new sources of nat-
      ural gas, and actively participate in construction of natural gas source introduction
      and transport routes projects. Distributed energy source construction will be
      pushed forward to realize the diversified and scaled application of urban energy
      supply.



      确保城市水资源供给安全。探索建立长三角区域内水源地联动及水资源应急机制，完
      善市域“两江并举，多源互补”供水格局，实现长江、黄浦江多水源互补互备。加强
      地下水的应急备用能力建设，鼓励河湖水、雨水、再生水在供水系统中的综合利用。
      Safeguard supply security of urban water resources. Efforts will be made to
      build a mechanism to link up water sources in the Yangtze River Delta and
      respond to water resource emergencies, and to improve water supply that centers
      on two rivers (Yangtze River and Huangpu River) with multiple supplementary
      sources, so that the two rivers may be mutually supplemented in terms of supply
      from multiple sources. Utilization of groundwater will be enhanced as emergency
      standby water resources, and the comprehensive utilization of river and lake
      water, rainwater and recycled water will also be encouraged.




69｜
    构建城市防灾减灾体系，保障城市安全运行
    Establish an urban disaster prevention and mitigation system to safeguard
    urban security

强化防灾减灾救援空间保障。统筹城市应急避难场所和救灾、疏散通道等城市安全空
间的规划建设，保障救援、疏散通道，完善应急避难场所布局，依托社区构建分布式、
全覆盖的防灾、疏散、安全救援管理单元，形成城市网格化安全管理格局。

Increase disaster prevention and rescue infrastructure.Urban safety infrastruc-
ture, such as emergency shelters and rescue or evacuation routes, will be included
in the overall planning and construction, to ensure smooth access to rescue or
evacuation routes and optimize the layout of emergency shelters. In reliance
upon communities, a distributed and full-coverage disaster prevention, evacua-
tion and safe rescue management unit will be built to form an urban networked
safety management model.



确保城市生命线安全运行。优化完善市政公用基础设施和轨道交通等重要设施的布局
和建设标准。推动综合管廊建设，打造智慧型生命线工程运行管理、服务体系，保障
食品供应、交通信息系统、给排水系统、电力系统等方面运行的安全可靠度。

Ensure safe operation of urban lifelines. The layout of municipal utility facilities,
rail transit and other important facilities will be optimized with construction stan-
dards improved. The construction of comprehensive tunnels will be pushed for-
ward to establish a management and service system to operate intelligent lifeline
project, and ensure safety and reliability of food supply, and operation of traffic
information system, water supply/drainage system and electricity system.



建立应急预警机制。完善以社区为单元的城市网格化安全管理，提高城市应急响应能
力和恢复能力，加强风险监测管理与分析，建立健全跨区域、跨部门的城市风险联防
联控体系，提高灾害预警和疏散救灾指挥能力。
Establish an emergency alert mechanism. Efforts will be put to improve the
urban grid safety management network that takes community as the unit. The
urban emergency response and recovery capability will be improved with the
management and analysis of risk oversight enhanced. A cross-regional and
inter-departmental urban risk joint prevention and control system will be estab-
lished and improved to boost the ability to alert the disaster and command the
evacuation and rescue during the disaster.




                                                                                        ｜70
      第四部分
      Part IV

      更有力的规划
      实施保障
      ENSURING THE
      IMPLEMENTATION
        优化“两规融合、多规合一”的空间规划体系
        Optimize the Spatial Planning System of “Integrated Urban Planning and Land
        Use Planning Schemes as well as Promotion of ‘Multi-sectors’ Plans in One”

        健全政策法规体系
        Perfect the Policy and Regulation System


        建立多方协同的规划实施机制
        Establish a Master-Plan Implementation Mechanism Involving
        Multiple Parties

        健全规划的“监测-评估-维护”机制
        Perfect the “Monitoring-Assessment-Maintenance” Mechanism of the
        Master Plan




71｜
｜72
              优化“两规融合、多规合一”的空间规划体系
              Optimize the Spatial Planning System of “Integrated Urban
              Planning and Land Use Planning Schemes as well as Promotion
              of ‘Multi-sectors’ Plans in One”

      以主体功能区规划为基础，以城市总体规划和土地利用总体规划为主体，优化“两规融合、
      多规合一”的空间规划体系。在此基础上，从空间维度和时间维度完善空间规划体系，推
      进规划实施。

      The spatial planning system of “integrated urban planning and land use planning schemes
      as well as promotion of ‘multi-sectors’ plans in one” will be optimized by taking the plan-
      ning of main functional areas as the basis, and master planning of the city and land utiliza-
      tion as the principal part. On such basis, the spatial planning system will be improved in the
      dimensions of space and time to promote the planning implementation.


      在空间维度上，坚持分层管理，形成“总体规划－单元规划－详细规划”等三个规划层次，
      每一层次规划均应发挥“多规合一”的平台作用。
      Adhere to the hierarchical management in the space dimension and build the
      three-level planning, i.e., overall planning, unit planning and detailed planning. The
      planning at each level shall act as a platform for “multi-sectors’ plans in One” .

      在时间维度上，以近期行动规划和年度实施计划为载体，明确分阶段实施目标和行动计划，
      与国民经济和社会发展规划、市政府年度重大工程安排和财政支出相衔接，指导城市建
      设实施和土地利用管理五年规划。
      Specify the staged implementation target and action plan by taking the recent
      action plan and annual implementation plan as the carrier in the time dimension,
      and connect with planning of national economic and social development, the
      annual arrangement of major projects by the municipal government and finan-
      cial expenditure to guide urban construction implementation and land utilization
      management five year plan.




73｜
      健全规划法规体系
      Improve the Policy and Regulation System


健全依法决策的体制机制，把公众参与、专家论证、风险评估等纳入规划决策的法定
程序。深化研究和制定重点地区和重要领域的相关法规，强化各部门、各地区政策措
施在空间上的统筹协同。以“永久基本农田保护红线、城市开发边界、生态保护红线、
文化保护控制线”作为城市空间管控的底线，深化完善“总量锁定、增量递减、存量优化、
流量增效、质量提高”的土地利用管控政策。
Improve the system to make decisions by law, and incorporate public participation,
expert argumentation, risk assessment, and other factors into the legal procedures
of planning and decision-making. Deepen research and formulate relevant laws and
regulations for key areas and key sectors, and reinforce the overall planning and co-
ordination of policy and measures of various departments and districts in terms of
the space. Take “permanent prime cropland conservation red line, urban devel-
opment boundary, ecological conservation red line, and cultural preservation
control line” as the bottom line for urban space management and control, deepen
and improve land utilization management and control policies to “maintain total
land area, reduce land increase, optimize land stock, and increase efficiency of
land in use and improve land’ s quality” .




      建立多方协同的规划实施机制
      Establish a Master-Plan Implementation Mechanism Involving Mul-
      tiple Parties


从规划编制到实施全过程，建立“政府－市场－社会”多方协同的规划实施机制，共
同维护规划实施的公平性，共同分享城市发展的收益。提升政府公共服务水平，强化
城市网格化管理，完善公众参与的规划实施机制，搭建多方参与规划实施的平台，加
强规划编制和实施的全过程公众参与。

Establish a plan implementation mechanism with the coordination of multiple par-
ties (government–market–society) throughout the course from the plan formula-
tion to implementation, to jointly maintain equality in the implementation, and
share the benefits of urban development. Increase the government’ s public
service, enhance urban grid management and improve the planning implemen-
tation mechanism for public participation; build a platform for the participa-
tion of multiple parties in the plan implementation, and strengthen public
participation throughout the course from the plan formulation and implemen-
tation.




                                                                                        ｜74
          健全规划的“监测 - 评估 - 维护”机制
          Improve the “Monitoring-Assessment-Maintenance” Mechanism of
          the Master Plan


      依托城市发展战略数据平台，建立规划实施的动态监测、定期评估和及时维护的机制。
      根据评估结果及时调整相关实施策略，并指导近期建设规划，年度实施计划的编制，
      实现规划动态维护。
      Establish mechanisms for dynamic monitoring, periodic assessment and timely
      maintenance of the plan implementation in reliance upon the urban develop-
      ment strategic data platform. Promptly adjust relevant implementation poli-
      cies pursuant to the assessment results, and guide recent construction
      planning and drafting of annual implementation plan, so as to maintain the
      plan dynamically.




75｜
                                   设计团队
                上海市城市总体规划编制工作领导小组办公室秘书处
                              上海麦肯光明Craft
                        感谢视觉中国和全景图片提供照片
                             感谢方正字体提供字体
                      如有涉及版权问题，请与设计团队联系


                                                  Design Team
Secretariat of the Leading Group Office of Shanghai Master Plan
             McCann Erickson Guangming Ltd (Shanghai) Craft
   Photos courtesy of Visual China Group and Panorama Media
                            Fonts courtesy of foundertype.com
        Please contact the Design Team for any copyright issue
让城市因为我们而更加美好
 Better City, Better Life
   http://www.supdri.com/2035/




                                 This reading is printed using recycled paper.
               Environmental protection is a fundamental duty of every citizen.
                                                  本书采用环保再生纸印刷
                                                  爱护环境             人人有责
